Create Blog Post “build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api” (#1929)
Nexmo/deved-platform: content/blog/en/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api.md

---

> title: Build an Appointment Scheduler using JS, Firebase and the Vonage API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build an Appointment Scheduler using Node, Firebase, and Vonage
```

description: Let's build an appointment scheduler using Node.js, Firebase,
  Express and the Vonage Messages API.
author: amanda-cavallaro
published: true
published_at: 2021-12-16T12:45:57.235Z
updated_at: 2021-12-16T12:45:57.260Z
category: tutorial
tags:
  - "#firebase"
  - "#messages-api"
  - "#javascript"
comments: true
spotlight: false
redirect: ""
canonical: ""
outdated: false
replacement_url: ""
---
## Introduction

> In this tutorial, we are going to build an appointment scheduler web application using Node.js, Firebase, and the [Vonage Messages API](https://developer.vonage.com/messaging/sms/overview). The [GitHub repository for this project is also available, feel free to clone it here](https://github.com/nexmo-community/appointment-scheduler).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we are going to build an appointment scheduler web application using Node.js, Firebase, and the [Vonage Messages API](https://developer.vonage.com/messaging/sms/overview). The [GitHub repository for this project is also available, feel free to clone it here](https://github.com/Vonage-Community/blog-messages_api-node_firebase-appointment_scheduler).
```

* Select if you want to enable analytics. We won't in this tutorial
* Click on the button to create the project
* Wait for the project to be created

![Project being created](/content/blog/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api/2projectbeingcreated.png "Project being created")

* Once the project is ready, click to continue. You will be taken to your project's console view
* Set the Billing type by clicking on the gear icon ⚙️, followed by Usage and Billing, then on the Details & Settings tab and modify the plan to use Blaze. This pay-as-you-go plan is required when using a third-party API

### Install Firebase Tools CLI

From your terminal, install the Firebase tools with NPM if you don't already have them by typing: `npm install -g firebase-tools`.
Next, type firebase login. This will open a window in your browser which will either authenticate you automatically (if you're already logged in) or ask you for your credentials. 
Once that's complete you now have the Firebase CLI installed.

### Create and Set Up a RealTime Database

> Now it's time for us to create the NoSQL database instance that will hold the appointment slots' information. As the person interacting with the view picks an appointment date and time or adds in a code to cancel their appointment, that slot will be added or removed from the Firebase RealTime Database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it's time for us to create the NoSQL database instance that will hold the appointment slots' information. Our app will include a view where a user will be able to make or cancel appointments. As the person interacting with the view picks an appointment date and time, that slot will be added or removed from the Firebase RealTime Database.
```

* From the Firebase Console Menu, click on "Realtime Database" under Build

![Button to create the database](/content/blog/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api/3createdatabase.png "Button to create the database")

* Click on "Create Database"
* Select the Realtime Database location where your data will be stored and click on `next`

> * Select if you will use the database in locked or test mode. For this example, I am using the test mode

Reviewer: Addded the documentation link, thanks.

> * Select if you will use the database in locked or test mode. For this example, I am using the test mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Select if you will use the database in locked or test mode. For this example, I am using the test mode
```
```suggestion
* Select if you will use the database in [locked or test mode](https://firebase.google.com/docs/rules/basics#default_rules_locked_mode). For this example, I am using the test mode
```

* Click `enable`

  ![Database created](/content/blog/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api/4databasecreated.png "Database created")

### Import the Database JSON File

> Let's import an example database that already contains some slots allocated from which you'll be able to add and remove future slots. You can create a file called `myAppointments.json` containing the below code snippet and from the console import this JSON file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's import an example database which already contains some allocated slots, and from which you'll be able to add and remove future slots. You can create a file called `myAppointments.json` containing the JSON in the snippet below, and then import this file from the console.
```

```JSON
myAppointments.json
{
  "myAppointments": {
    "0": {
      "date": "2021-06-01T09:00",
      "userId": "1234abcd"
    },
    "new_activity_7kh3a3a3z": {
      "date": "2021-06-01T08:50",
      "userId": "_7kh3a3a3z"
    },
    "new_activity_etxen95x3": {
      "date": "2021-06-01T08:40",
      "userId": "_etxen95x3"
    }
  }
}
```

![Import Database](/content/blog/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api/5databaseimport.gif "Import Database")

#### Add the Database Rules

The Firebase Realtime Database Rules determine who can access your database, how your indexes are built, and how your data is structured.

> 

Reviewer: Hey, @superchilled  Thanks for the review! Could you elaborate here, please? End of which sentence?

> 

Reviewer 2: The one on line 94 (just before the bullet points):

> The Firebase Realtime Database Rules determine who can access your database, how your indexes are built, and how your data is structured.

* Copy and paste the rules from the below code snippet to your console in order to set the `myAppointments` collection to be indexed by the `date` field.
* Click on `Publish`

```JSON
{
  "rules": {
    ".read": "now < 1643842800000",  // 2022-2-3
    ".write": "now < 1643842800000",  // 2022-2-3
    "myAppointments": {
      ".indexOn": ["date"]
    }
  }
}
```

![Edit Firebase Database Rules](/content/blog/build-an-appointment-scheduler-using-js-firebase-and-the-vonage-api/6editrules.gif "Edit Firebase Database Rules")

## Create the Project Structure

By the end of this tutorial, this is roughly how your project structure will look like. In the following steps, we will create the files that will build up the content, appearance, functionalities, and handle the services we will use.

```bash
📦appointment-scheduler  
 ┣ 📂public  
 ┃ ┣ 📂styles  
 ┃ ┃ ┗ 📜styles.css  
 ┃ ┣ 📜favicon.ico  
 ┃ ┗ 📜index.html  
 ┣ 📂script  
 ┃ ┣ 📜server.js  
 ┣ 📜.env  
 ┣ 📜.firebaserc
 ┣ 📜README.md   
 ┣ 📜firebase.json   
 ┣ 📜package-lock.json  
 ┣ 📜package.json  
 ┣ 📜serviceAccountKey.json  
```

## Setup

> * Create the project folder: `mkdir appointment-scheduler && cd appointment-scheduler`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create the project folder and `cd` into it: `mkdir appointment-scheduler && cd appointment-scheduler`
```

> * Initialize NPM: `npm init`. This command prompts to add information about the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initialize NPM: `npm init`. This command prompts you to add information about the project
```

* Install the dependencies: `npm install @vonage/server-sdk dotenv uuid express firebase-admin firebase-functions`

> * Type `firebase init`. Since you already created a project in the dashboard, you can select `Use an existing project` which will prompt you to choose the desired project. You can see my example with my project id `vonage-appointment-scheduler` below. I also choose to use the `Realtime Database` feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Type `firebase init`. Since you already created a project in the dashboard, you can select `Use an existing project` which will prompt you to choose the desired project. You can see my example with my project id `vonage-appointment-scheduler` below. I also choose to use the `Realtime Database` feature
```
```suggestion
* Type `firebase init`. Since we already created a project in the dashboard, you can select `Use an existing project` which will prompt you to choose the desired project. You can see my example with my project id `vonage-appointment-scheduler` below. I also chose to use the `Realtime Database` feature
```

```bash
? Which Firebase features do you want to set up for this directory? Press Space to select features, then Enter to confirm your choices. Realtime Database: Configure a security rules file for Realtime Database and (optionally) provision default instance

=== Project Setup

First, let's associate this project directory with a Firebase project.
You can create multiple project aliases by running firebase use --add, 
but for now, we'll just set up a default project.

? Please select an option: Use an existing project
? Select a default Firebase project for this directory: vonage-appointment-scheduler (vonage appointment scheduler)
i  Using project vonage-appointment-scheduler (vonage appointment scheduler)
```

## Create the HTML Content

> Did you know that the HTML input has many types for date and time? For instance, we have: `date`, `datetime-local`, `time`. For this tutorial, we will use `<input type="datetime-local">`. It's not as good as a proper library as there can be some inconsistencies, but it works for the purpose of this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Did you know that the HTML input element has many type options for date and time selection? For instance, we have: `date`, `datetime-local`, `time`. For this tutorial, we will use `<input type="datetime-local">`. This approach is perhaps not as robust as using date-time library, as there can be some inconsistencies, but it works for the purpose of this tutorial.
```

      <form action="/appointment" method="POST">
        <div>
          <label for="slot">Choose your slot: </label>
          <input
            id="slot"
            type="datetime-local"
            name="slotdate"
            min="2021-06-01T08:30"
            max="2021-10-30T16:30"
            step="300"
            required
          />
          <span class="validity"></span>
        </div>
        <div>
          <label for="phonenumber">Your phone number:</label>
          <input type="tel" id="phonenumber" name="phonenumber" required />
          <span class="validity"></span>
        </div>
        <div>
          <input type="submit" value="Book slot!" />
        </div>
      </form>
      <form action="/cancelAppointment" method="POST">
        <div>
          <input type="text" name="code" placeholder="code" />
          <input type="submit" value="Remove slot!" />
        </div>
      </form>
    </main>
  </body>
</html>
```

## Add CSS Styling

For this demonstration web app, we have the styling with the contents centered on the page in addition to a red ✖ in case the input is invalid and a ✓ in case it is valid. 

> 

Reviewer 2: > For this demonstration web app, we have the styling with the contents centered on the page in addition to...

==>

> For this demonstration web app, we'll  add some styling to center the contents on the page, and also display...

> For this demonstration web app, we have the styling with the contents centered on the page in addition to a red ✖ in case the input is invalid and a ✓ in case it is valid. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this demonstration web app, we'll add some styling to center the contents on the page, and also display a red ✖ in case the input is invalid and a ✓ in case it is valid. 
```

    margin-bottom: 10px;
    display: flex;
    align-items: center;
}

label {
  display: inline-block;
  width: 300px;
}

input:invalid+span:after {
    content: '✖';
    color: red;
    padding-left: 5px;
}

input:valid+span:after {
    content: '✓';
    color: green;
    padding-left: 5px;
}
```

## Create the Environment Variables File

* Create the `.env` and populate it with the below information

```bash
FIREBASE_DATABASE_URL=
VONAGE_API_KEY=
VONAGE_API_SECRET=
VONAGE_FROM_NUMBER=
VONAGE_TO_NUMBER=
```

* The `FIREBASE_DATABASE_URL` can be found on the Firebase console
* The `VONAGE_API_KEY`and the `VONAGE_API_SECRET` can be found in the [Vonage Dashboard](https://identity.nexmo.com/)
* The `VONAGE_FROM_NUMBER` contains the number, name, or brand that will appear as the sender of the message
* The `VONAGE_TO_NUMBER` is the number that will receive the SMS messages

## Create the JavaScript file `server.js`

We will create the `server.js` to handle the requests posted by the UI.  I'll show you step by step how we will build it. [You can find the complete server file here](https://github.com/nexmo-community/appointment-scheduler/blob/main/script/server_messages_api.js).

> 

Reviewer 2: > We will create the `server.js` to handle the requests posted by the UI

==>

> We will create the `server.js` to tell Express how handle the requests posted by the UI

> We will create the `server.js` to handle the requests posted by the UI.  I'll show you step by step how we will build it. [You can find the complete server file here](https://github.com/nexmo-community/appointment-scheduler/blob/main/script/server_messages_api.js).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will create the `server.js` to tell Express how to handle the requests posted by the UI. I'll show you step by step how we will build it. [You can find the complete server file here](https://github.com/nexmo-community/appointment-scheduler/blob/main/script/server_messages_api.js).
```

Our web app will use express and it will read the static files we previously created from the folder `public`.

> 

Reviewer 2: > created from the folder `public`

==>

> created from the `public` folder

> Our web app will use express and it will read the static files we previously created from the folder `public`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our web app will use express and it will read the static files we previously created from the `public` folder.
```

```javascript
// script/server.js
require('dotenv').config();
const express = require('express');
const app = require('express')();
const port = 3000; //setting the port to listen to as 3000
const admin = require('firebase-admin');
const Vonage = require('@vonage/server-sdk');
const { v4: uuidv4 } = require('uuid');

app.use(express.static('public'));

app.use(express.json());

app.use(express.urlencoded({ extended: true }));
```

### Add the Service Account

A Firebase service account can be used to authenticate various Firebase features, for our project we will use the Firebase Admin SDK to access our Database URL.

* From the Firebase Console click on the gear and select the Service Account tab
* Click on the button to `generate key`
* Add the generated file to the root of your project and rename it to `serviceAccountKey.json`
* Copy and paste the Admin SDK configuration snippet to your project as you can see in the following step of this tutorial to initialize Firebase. We are using `${process.env.FIREBASE_DATABASE_URL` to read the URL from the `.env` file but it's the same Database URL found on the Firebase Admin SDK configuration.

> 

Reviewer 2: > Copy and paste the Admin SDK configuration snippet to your project as you can see in the following step of this tutorial to initialize Firebase.

==>

> Copy and paste the Admin SDK configuration snippet to your project, as you can see in the following step of this tutorial, to initialize Firebase.

* Add this below code snippet to your `server.js` to initialize Firebase.

```javascript
const serviceAccount = require('../serviceAccountKey.json');

// Initializes firebase
admin.initializeApp({
  credential: admin.credential.cert(serviceAccount),
  databaseURL: `${process.env.FIREBASE_DATABASE_URL}`,
});

// A Reference represents a specific location in your Database and can be 
// used for reading or writing data to that Database location.
ref = admin.database().ref('/myAppointments');
```

### Initialize the Vonage API object

We create the instance of the Vonage client class, initializing it with the Vonage API Key and Secret that you have previously added to your `.env` file.

* Add the below code snippet to your `server.js` to add Vonage.

```javascript
const vonage = new Vonage({
  apiKey: process.env.VONAGE_API_KEY,
  apiSecret: process.env.VONAGE_API_SECRET,
});
```

### Create the getDateTime() Function

The HTML input type `datetime-local` is formatted as **YYYY-MM-DDThh:mm**.
So we will separate the date from the hour by splitting it on the character `T`. For instance in the example `2018-06-12T19:30` we'd have `2018-06-12` for the date and  `19:30` for the hour.

> 

Reviewer 2: > So we will separate the date from the hour...

==>

> So we will write a function to separate the date from the hour...

* Add this below code snippet to your `server.js` to add the `getDateTime()` function

```javascript
  const getDateTime = (slot) => {
    return slot.split('T');
  };
```

### Create the `/appointment` endpoint

It's time to create the `/appointment` endpoint to handle the POST verb. This endpoint will manage the information related to the appointments slots. This endpoint will check if the slot is available, it will add the slot to the Firebase database, and finally, it will send an SMS confirmation back to the user's phone using the Vonage Messages API.

> 

Reviewer 2: > It's time to create the `/appointment` endpoint to handle the POST verb.

==>

> It's time to create the `/appointment` endpoint to handle the POST requests for creating an appointment.

* Add this below code snippet to your `server.js` to create the `/appointment` endpoint.

```javascript
app.post('/appointment', async (request, response) => {
  let phonenumber = request.body.phonenumber;
  let slot = request.body.slotdate;
  let [date, time] = getDateTime(slot);

  // Checks if a slot is available
  checkIfAvailable = async (slot) => {};
  
  // Adds to Database
  addToDatabase = () =>  {};
  
  // Sends an SMS back to the user's phone using the Vonage Messages API
  sendSMStoUser = async (code) => {};
});
```

Let's now expand on the stubs for the required functionalities. 

> 

Reviewer 2: > Let's now expand on the stubs for the required functionalities. 

==>

> You may have noticed that much of the functionality within the request handler has not yet been implemented, so let's now expand on the stubs for the required functionalities.

          } else {
            return reject(
              new Error(
                `Message failed with error: ${responseData.messages[0]['error-text']}`
              )
            );
          }
        }
      });
    });
  };
```

### Finalize the Business Logic

The piece of code below is responsible to call the previously created helper functions. If the slot is available, the user will have their slot added to the database and have the SMS sent back to them. Otherwise, they will be requested to choose a different time slot.

```javascript
let available = await checkIfAvailable(slot);

if (available) {
	let code = addToDatabase();
	await sendSMStoUser(code);
	response.send(`This slot is available, booking it for you now: ${slot}`);
} else {
	// Sends user error
	response.send(
		`Sorry, you'll need to choose a different slot.${slot} is already busy.`
	);
}
```

### Cancel the Appointment `/cancelAppointment`

Let's create the `/cancelAppointment` endpoint handling the POST verb. This endpoint will manage the process of canceling the appointment slots from the database by using a code provided by the user that they received upon scheduling their appointment. 

> 

Reviewer 2: > Let's create the `/cancelAppointment` endpoint handling the POST verb.

==>

> Let's create the `/cancelAppointment` endpoint handling the POST requests for cancelling an appointment.
